Socket.IO 1.4.0
================================


Socket.IO 1.4.0 ship with new features like **automatic compression**
for XHR and WebSockets, lots of bug fixes and significant performance
and memory improvements.

Compression is enabled by default, as it’s highly beneficial for most
application payloads. The following example shows the savings for a
realtime stream of tweets.

.. container::
   :name: tweets-compression-demo

The compression gains will vary by transport. For example, WebSocket
defaults to a window size of 32kb when **DEFLATE** compression is
enabled. Repeated occurrences of strings within that window will be
compressed. The following demo (inspired by Julia Evans work) will
highlight what the LZ77 algorithm de-duplicates from the traffic sent by
the Twitter stream that matches javascript.

.. container::
   :name: lz77-compression-demo

.. raw:: html

   <p style="font-size: 10px; color: #999">

How this demo works: we re-implemented a part of LZ77 in JavaScript. A
React component then renders the compressed strings.

The longer the string, the darker the shade of yellow displayed.

In addition to this default behavior, we’ve introduced the capability to
perform selective per-message compression, by introducing the
``compress`` flag when emitting an event.

.. code:: js

   socket.compress(true).emit(‘hi’, { some: ‘data’ });

To configure the defaults, we’ve introduced the following two options
that you can pass to socket.io (and engine.io) when starting the server:

-  ``perMessageDeflate`` – options to customize WebSocket compression
   (see here) or ``true`` for defaults (``true``).

-  ``httpCompression`` – options to customize compression for HTTP
   polling transports or ``true`` for defaults (``true``)

The memory overhead when compression is enabled is not inexistent,
however. Make sure to account for a 300kb~ overhead per connection in
terms of memory allocation. Read here about the parameters you can
customize to change how much memory is allocated and how aggressively
data is compressed.

The following improvements have been made to the **server**:

-  Assume 443 port when passing ``https://`` to the ``origins``
   parameter – Evan Lucas
-  Improve detection of binary data inside events (in the ``has-binary``
   module) – Gunther Brunner
-  Warn about missing ``error`` event handlers on sockets to prevent
   silent hard-to-debug situations
-  Allow a custom function for the ``allowRequest`` function for origins
   verification
-  Fixes for “use strict” environments – Naoyuki Kanezawa
-  Prevent users calling the ack function multiple times – Kevin Jose
   Martin
-  Fixed potential memory leaks with open sockets when upgrade fails –
   Naoyuki Kanezawa
-  Fix lingering requests when a polling error occurs – Naoyuki Kanezawa
-  Drastically more memory efficient when keeping track of clients –
   Damien Arrachequesne
-  Drastically more memory efficient when keeping track of rooms –
   Jérémy Lal
-  Trigger callback if the client is already in the given room when
   ``join`` is called – Damien Arrachequesne
-  Minor parser fixes and performance improvements.

The following improvements have been made to the **client**:

-  Fix for specifying custom ports when connecting
-  2 or more connections to the same namespace now create new sockets,
   instead of reusing a single one.
-  Added new reserved ``ping`` and ``pong`` events when a heartbeat is
   emitted and received.
-  Add support for environments that extend Object.prototype – Damien
   Arrachequesne
-  Fixes for “use strict” environments – Naoyuki Kanezawa
-  Added an ``extraHeaders`` feature for custom headers in HTTP
   transports (non-WebSocket)
-  Fix handling of disconnection while in the ``opening`` state.
-  Improved error handling for unmatched acknowledgements.
-  Parser fixes and improvements.

We’ve also released **socket.io-redis** ``0.2.0`` with significant
performance improvements.

Special thanks to Damien Arrachequesne, Naoyuki Kanezawa and Jérémy Lal
for their amazing and continued contributions that made this release
possible.
